Add frameworks section with React (#1052)
lit/lit.dev: packages/lit-dev-content/site/docs/frameworks/react.md

The [@lit-labs/react](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/react) package provides web component and reactive controller integration for React. While React can render web components as-is, there are a few gaps in the developer experience. You can't easily pass React props to custom element properties or add event listeners to custom elements. (For more information on the limitations of React's web component integration, see [Custom Elements Everywhere](https://custom-elements-everywhere.com/libraries/react/results/results.html).)

The `@lit-labs/react` package provides two main entry points:

-   `createComponent()` creates a React component that _wraps_ an existing web component. The wrapper allows you to set props on the component and add event listeners to the component like you would any other React component.

-   `useController()` lets you use a Lit reactive controller as a React hook.  

## createComponent

The `createComponent()` function makes a React component wrapper for a custom element class. The wrapper correctly passes React `props` to properties accepted by the custom element and listens for events dispatched by the custom element.

> ### How it works

Author: Done

> For properties, the wrapper interrogates the web component class to discover its available properties. Then any React props passed with property names are set on the custom element as properties and not attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During a render, the wrapper receives props from React and based on the options and the custom element class, changes the behavior of some of the props:

* If a prop name is a property on the custom element, as determined with an `in` check, the wrapper sets that property on the element to the prop value
* If a prop name is an event name passed to the `events` option, the prop value is passed to `addEventListener()` with the name of the event.
* Otherwise the prop is passed to React's `createElement()` to be rendered as an attribute.

Both properties and events are added in `componentDidMount()` and `componentDidUpdate()` callbacks, because the element must have already been instantiated by React in order to access it.
```

For events, `createComponent()` accepts a mapping of React event prop names to events fired by the custom element. For example passing `{onFoo: 'foo'}` means a function passed via a prop named `onFoo` will be called when the custom element fires the `foo` event with the event as an argument.

### Usage

Import `React`, a custom element class, and `createComponent`.

```js
import React from 'react';
import {createComponent} from '@lit-labs/react';
import {MyElement} from './my-element.js';

export const MyElementComponent = createComponent({
  tagName: 'my-element',
  elementClass: MyElement,
  react: React,
  events: {
    onActivate: 'activate',
    onChange: 'change',
  },
});
```

After defining the React component, you can use it just as you would any other React component.

```jsx
<MyElementComponent
  active={isActive}
  onActivate={(e) => setIsActive(e.active)}
/>
```

> #### Typescript

Reviewer: I'm not sure a separate TypeScript section makes as much sense as having details on properties and events. This whole section is basically on events.

A properties section could talk about the difference between properties and attributes when you have both?

I also think it might be worth covering each option: tagName (must be the name the element was registered with), elementClass (hopefully self-explanatory?), react (for compatibility with CJS and so you could pass in Preact).

Author: I added a section for the options preceding this. I renamed the "Typescript" heading to "Typing event handler props" as a usage example of the `EventName` utility type we vend. We go into properties/attributes in the "how it works" section.

import {MyElement} from './my-element.js';

export const MyElementComponent = createComponent({
  tagName: 'my-element',
  elementClass: MyElement,
  react: React,
  events: {
    onClick: 'pointerdown' as EventName<PointerEvent>,
    onChange: 'input',
  },
});
```

Event callbacks will match their type cast. In the example below, a `PointerEvent` is expected in the `onClick` callback.

```tsx
<MyElementComponent
  onClick={(e: PointerEvent) => {
    console.log('DOM PointerEvent called!');
  }}
  onChange={(e: Event) => {
    console.log(e);
  }}
/>
```

{% aside "info" "no-header" %}
This type casting is not associated to any component property. Be careful to use the corresponding type dispatched or bubbled from the webcomponent. Incorrect types might result in additional properties, missing properties, or properties of the wrong type.
{% endaside %}

## useController

Reactive controllers allow developers to hook in to a component's lifecycle to bundle
together state and behavior related to a feature. They are similar to React
hooks in the user cases and capabilities, but are plain JavaScript objects
instead of functions with hidden state.

> `useController()` is a React hook that creates and stores a reactive controller

Reviewer: This is a bit more how it works that why you'd use it. I think saying that `useController()` let you make hooks out of controllers so you can share "headless" state and behavior across web components and frameworks is key.

and drives its lifecycle using React hooks like `useState` and
`useLayoutEffect`.

> ### How it works

Reviewer: Move this down as well

Author: Done

-   `createComponent()` creates a React component that _wraps_ an existing web component. The wrapper allows you to set props on the component and add event listeners to the component like you would any other React component.

-   `useController()` lets you use a Lit reactive controller as a React hook.  

## createComponent

The `createComponent()` function makes a React component wrapper for a custom element class. The wrapper correctly passes React `props` to properties accepted by the custom element and listens for events dispatched by the custom element.

### Usage

Import `React`, a custom element class, and `createComponent`.

```js
import React from 'react';
import {createComponent} from '@lit-labs/react';
import {MyElement} from './my-element.js';

export const MyElementComponent = createComponent({
  tagName: 'my-element',
  elementClass: MyElement,
  react: React,
  events: {
    onActivate: 'activate',
    onChange: 'change',
  },
});
```

After defining the React component, you can use it just as you would any other React component.

```jsx
<MyElementComponent
  active={isActive}
  onActivate={(e) => setIsActive(e.active)}
  onChange={handleChange}
/>
```

> 

Reviewer: We have some nice examples in the playground we should link to from here. We should also probably link to the docs from comments (or links in the previews) of some of the playgrounds.

Author: Good idea. Done!

#### Options

`createComponent` takes an options object with the following properties:

- `tagName`: The custom element's tag name.
- `elementClass`: The custom element class.
- `react`: The imported `React` object. This is used to create the wrapper component with the user supplied `React`. This can also be an import of `preact-compat`.
- `events`: An object that maps an event handler prop to an event name fired by the custom element.

> #### Typing event handler props

Reviewer: I think we should add a section on slots, just pointing out that React children render to the default slot, and if you want to render to a different slot you need to use the standard `slot` attribute, and that means if you want to slot a React component to a named slot you need to wrap it in an element like `<div slot="foo">` and that you can use `display: contents` to hide that element...

Author: Good idea. Added the section above the typing event one as it seems more relevant/important. And linked to the slot example in the playground too.

Reviewer: I do think that this could still be just "Events" with an initial paragraph describing the event prop to event name mapping in more detail. Maybe saying what naming conventions are (while the name can be whatever you want, they should start with `on`, etc), and that you need to make sure that the event name doesn't collide with other properties on the element.

Author: Regarding prop naming convention, future React support looks like it'll straight up take anything after `on` as the event name. 

Implementation: https://github.com/facebook/react/blob/161f6ae42cf570d3daec355abcf3b006c58315da/packages/react-dom-bindings/src/client/DOMPropertyOperations.js#L163-L171

Tests:
https://github.com/facebook/react/blob/161f6ae42cf570d3daec355abcf3b006c58315da/packages/react-dom/src/__tests__/DOMPropertyOperations-test.js#L173-L213

I'm thinking our example follow this and do `onmy-event` for the prop name that gets called for `my-event`.

Reviewer: yeah, that's a great idea. Mention that re recommendation is to be compatible with React on this front.

together state and behavior related to a feature. They are similar to React
hooks in the user cases and capabilities, but are plain JavaScript objects
instead of functions with hidden state.

`useController()` lets you make React hooks out of reactive controllers allowing for the sharing of state and behaviors across web components and React.

### Usage

```jsx
import React from 'react';
import {useController} from '@lit-labs/react/use-controller.js';
import {MouseController} from '@example/mouse-controller';

// Write a custom React hook function:
const useMouse = () => {
  // Use useController to create and store a controller instance:
  const controller = useController(React, (host) => new MouseController(host));
  // Return relevant data for consumption by the component:
  return controller.pos;
};

// Now use the new hook in a React component:
const Component = (props) => {
  const mousePosition = useMouse();
  return (
    <pre>
      x: {mousePosition.x}
      y: {mousePosition.y}
    </pre>
  );
};
```

See the [mouse controller example](../../composition/controllers/#example:-mousemovecontroller) in the reactive controller docs for its implementation.

### How it works

> `useController()` uses `useState` to create and store an instance of a controller and a `ReactControllerHost`. It then calls the controller's lifecycle from the hook body and `useLayoutEffect` callbacks, emulating the `ReactiveElement` lifecycle as closely as possible. `ReactControllerHost` implements `addController` so that controller composition works and nested controller lifecycles are called correctly. `ReactControllerHost` also implements `requestUpdate` by calling a `useState` setter, so that a controller with new renderable state can cause its host component to re-render.

Reviewer: This section needs some help here. It's a little too blunt.

```suggestion
`useController()` creates a custom host object for the controller passed to it and drives the controller's lifecycle by using React hooks.

- `useState()` is used to store an instance of a controller and a `ReactControllerHost`
- The hook body and `useLayoutEffect()` callbacks emulate the `ReactiveElement` lifecycle as closely as possible.
- `ReactControllerHost` implements `addController()` so that controller composition works and nested controller lifecycles are called correctly.
- `ReactControllerHost` also implements `requestUpdate()` by calling a `useState()` setter, so that a controller can cause its host component to re-render.
```

> Controller timings are implemented as follows:

Reviewer: I think we should drop this section

Author: Done

-   `createComponent()` creates a React component that _wraps_ an existing web component. The wrapper allows you to set props on the component and add event listeners to the component like you would any other React component.

-   `useController()` lets you use a Lit reactive controller as a React hook.  

## createComponent

The `createComponent()` function makes a React component wrapper for a custom element class. The wrapper correctly passes React `props` to properties accepted by the custom element and listens for events dispatched by the custom element.

### Usage

Import `React`, a custom element class, and `createComponent`.

```js
import React from 'react';
import {createComponent} from '@lit-labs/react';
import {MyElement} from './my-element.js';

export const MyElementComponent = createComponent({
  tagName: 'my-element',
  elementClass: MyElement,
  react: React,
  events: {
    onActivate: 'activate',
    onChange: 'change',
  },
});
```

After defining the React component, you can use it just as you would any other React component.

```jsx
<MyElementComponent
  active={isActive}
  onActivate={(e) => setIsActive(e.active)}
  onChange={handleChange}
/>
```

> {% aside "positive" "no-header" %}

Reviewer: I like this aside!

I wonder, can we have a standard "Try it" phrasing and some kind of different icon for playground links? @aomarks @e111077 if you have opinions there.

Reviewer 2: Why not just do:

`{% playground-ide "examples/react-basics/" %}` and embed it directly

Author: I had not considered that possibility! Is it fine to reference the same example in the doc while leaving it standalone in the playgrounds section too? I don't know if we have any precedence for that.

Reviewer 2: /shrug it should also stay up to date. Though there's a thing that goes through and essentially server renders the playground previews in the docs section. Not sure if that is limited to the `packages/lit-dev-content/samples/docs` folder

Author: I'll keep them as links to playground in an aside for now. Embedding the existing example is adding too much noise in my eyes when there are already code blocks right above it. I think it would be good future improvement to replace the code blocks with a tailored example.

See it in action in the [React playground examples](/playground/#sample=examples/react-basics).

{% endaside %}

#### Options

`createComponent` takes an options object with the following properties:

- `tagName`: The custom element's tag name.
- `elementClass`: The custom element class.
- `react`: The imported `React` object. This is used to create the wrapper component with the user supplied `React`. This can also be an import of `preact-compat`.
- `events`: An object that maps an event handler prop to an event name fired by the custom element.

#### Using slots

Children of component created with `createComponent()` will render to the default slot of the custom element.

```jsx
<MyElementComponent>
  <p>This will render in the default slot.</p>
</MyElementComponent>
```

To render the child to a specific named slot, the standard `slot` attribute can be added.

```jsx
<MyElementComponent>
  <p slot="foo">This will render in the slot named "foo".</p>
</MyElementComponent>
```

> Since React components cannot have a `slot` attribute, they will need to be wrapped with another container element. Giving it a `display: contents;` style will make this container disappear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since React components are not themselves HTML elements, they usually cannot directly have a `slot` attribute. To render into a named slot, the component will need to be wrapped with a container element that has a `slot` attribute. If a wrapper element interferes with styling, like for grid and flexbox layouts, giving it a `display: contents;` style ([See MDN for details](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display#box)) will remove the container from rendering, and only render its children.
```

```jsx
<MyElementComponent>
  <div slot="foo" style="display: contents;">
    <ReactComponent />
  </div>
</MyElementComponent>
```

> Try it out in the [React slots playground example](/playground/#sample=examples/react-slots).

Reviewer: Use the aside here too?

Author: Done

#### Typing event handler props

> The parameter type for the event handler prop can be refined by type casting the event name in the `events` options with the provided `EventName` utility type. Non-casted event names will fall back to the `Event` type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In TypeScript, the event type can be specified by casting the event name to the `EventName` utility type. This is a good practice to do so that React users will get the most accurate types for their event callbacks.

The `EventName` type is a string that takes an event interface as a type parameter. Here we cast the `'my-event'` name to an `EventName<MyEvent>` to provide the right event type:
```

```ts

> import type {EventName} from '@lit-labs/react';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

import React from 'react';
import {createComponent} from '@lit-labs/react';

> import {MyElement} from './my-element.js';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import {MyElement, type EventName} from './my-element.js';
```

export const MyElementComponent = createComponent({
  tagName: 'my-element',
  elementClass: MyElement,
  react: React,
  events: {

>     onClick: 'pointerdown' as EventName<PointerEvent>,

Reviewer: We shouldn't use a built-in event here, since the types are already correct.

"MyEvent" might be too generic, but I think it's ok here:

```suggestion
    onMyEvent: 'my-event' as EventName<MyEvent>,
```

>     onChange: 'input',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  },
});
```

> With the casting done above, a `PointerEvent` is expected for the parameter of the function provided to the `onClick` prop.

Reviewer: Casting the event name t `EventName<MyEvent>` causes the React component to have an `onMyEvent` callback prop that accepts a `MyEvent` parameter instead of a plain `Event`:

Author: Done

```tsx
<MyElementComponent

>   onClick={(e: PointerEvent) => {
>     // handle click
>   }}
>   onChange={(e: Event) => {
>     // handle change
>   }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  onMyEvent={(e: MyEvent) => {
    console.log(e.myEventData);
  }}
```

```jsx
<MyElementComponent>
  <p>This will render in the default slot.</p>
</MyElementComponent>
```

To render the child to a specific named slot, the standard `slot` attribute can be added.

```jsx
<MyElementComponent>
  <p slot="foo">This will render in the slot named "foo".</p>
</MyElementComponent>
```

Since React components are not themselves HTML elements, they usually cannot directly have a `slot` attribute. To render into a named slot, the component will need to be wrapped with a container element that has a `slot` attribute. If a wrapper element interferes with styling, like for grid and flexbox layouts, giving it a `display: contents;` style ([See MDN for details](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display#box)) will remove the container from rendering, and only render its children.

```jsx
<MyElementComponent>
  <div slot="foo" style="display: contents;">
    <ReactComponent />
  </div>
</MyElementComponent>
```

{% aside "positive" "no-header" %}

Try it out in the [React slots playground example](/playground/#sample=examples/react-slots).

{% endaside %}

#### Events

> The `events` option takes an object whose key will be the React prop name and value will be the event name. The function passed to the created React component as a prop that matches the key name will be called when the specified event is fired from the custom element. While the the React prop name can be whatever you want, the recommended convention is to add `on` in front of the event name. This is in line with how React is planning to implement event support for custom element properties. You should also make sure this prop name does not collide with any existing properties on the element.

Reviewer: This paragraph is a bit long and feels like it combines a few topics. Maybe something like this, or tweak as best you can:

```suggestion
The `events` option takes an object maps React prop names to event names. When a component user passes a callback prop with one of the event prop names, the wrapper will add it as an event handler for the corresponding event.

While the the React prop name can be whatever you want, the recommended convention is to add `on` in front of the event name. This matches how React is planning to implement event support for custom elements. You should also make sure this prop name does not collide with any existing properties on the element.
```
